Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
Norman Spinrad has strong opinions about science fiction in its place in today's world.
As a noted author who helped bring the science fiction new wave to this country, and as a
two-time president of the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad's ideas should
be heard.
One thing he feels strongly about is that science fiction has not been treated fairly
by book reviewers.
As a category, it is treated very unfairly and very cavalierly by the powers that be,
which is mainly the New York Times book review and the New York Review of Books and the so-called
New York Literary Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the way books
are published.
These people, for instance, came down on the American Book Awards, succeeded in getting
science fiction knocked out of the American Book Awards.
A real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was really bad to have
these awards given to things like science fiction, that it was bad to take it away from
a small jury which they could control and have thousands of people voting for.
A very elitist, social fascist bunch of people who I absolutely no use for.
And I'm sure they have no use for me.
As president of the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad has worked for some changes
in the field.
One thing that I'm already halfway through getting done is the international eyes, is
to have an overseas region with an overseas director on our board of directors.
Because science fiction writing and publishing really is an international community, American
writers sell their work all over the world.
English writers sell their work here.
Foreign language writers have different problems.
And we're all dealing with the same publishers.
It certainly is an international literature and it's the spirit of the future and the
spirit of internationalism.
So of course I felt it should be an international organization.
That's one thing.
The other thing that I want to do and halfway through doing is upgrading the Nebula Awards.
We have moved it out of the world.
At Hotel we're moving into a much bigger room.
And the world are trying to make it into a more significant event than it has been.
Again, orienting it towards the world at large rather than towards the little in group.
Spinrad has always been concerned with the image science fiction has with the general public.
He thinks general readers should be made more aware of science fiction's unique possibilities
and its genuine value.
We asked him if science fiction movies have a positive or negative influence on the public's image of the field.
Well, I don't know.
I don't think they... not really.
I mean, the image of science fiction in that respect has been very bad anyway.
I don't think the movies really add to the image, but I don't think they detract from it either.
If there are some better, more sophisticated movies they might help.
As it is, it's just kind of neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists.
I think it's positive and will prove to be positive in the long range.
Because a lot of people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction,
with which they are unfamiliar through these movies.
And now if you look at the evolution in the movies, you find that in the earlier science fiction movies,
if you're going into space or whatever, you had to spend like half an hour setting the thing.
This is a spaceship that takes off from the Earth. People float around it, you know,
and you have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery.
Now they can just start a movie bang right off, in a galaxy far away.
Boom. Here's a spaceship in a stromo pow, you know.
In other words, the first half hour of the conventional old-time science fiction movie is gone
because people are now familiar with this imagery.
And I think these movies have brought a lot of new people into familiarity with these images.
They've made these images part of the popular culture.
These movies have mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
And years from now, assuming that these people ever read anything,
they'll be ready to read science fiction of a more serious kind.
Assuming they're ready to read literature of a more serious kind at all,
because they'll be familiar with the material, familiar with the literature.
It won't seem strange and weird to them because they will have grown up with it.
That's why I think magazines, even magazines like Star-Logs,
in that sense will have a long-term positive impact.
More with Norman Spinrad on our next show.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Norman Spinrad's best-known novel may be Bug Jack Barron,
a book which has stirred controversy in both England and America.
It was published in this country in 1969, and it's a different sort of science fiction novel.
It's a good example of new wave science fiction.
Character and style are important, and it deals with social issues such as racism,
the establishment, drugs, the power of the media, and radical protests.
There is also a good deal of sex and violence in the book, and the language is highly colored.
But Spinrad, thanks to the plot of the book, conforms to traditional science fiction formulas.
Actually, what I was trying to do in a way, the book has a very traditional plot.
As far as I was concerned, it has a positive here, it has a negative here.
The hero wins, the villain loses.
All that stuff that is considered the traditional way of plotting a book,
and yet it's written in a different kind of way.
It kind of takes that superficial kind of plot and treats it in a realistic manner.
The protagonist, Jack Barron, is a powerfully influential television star
who has a talk show watched by 100 million people.
He uses the show as a battlefield to oppose corrupt elements of society.
Spinrad comments on Barron's use of power.
The book is about power.
Power itself is neutral as far as I'm concerned.
That's what people do with it that counts.
Barron is the guy who likes power, he keeps referring to it as a drug,
and knows that he can become addicted to it,
and for that reason, then he decided to stay away from it.
Then he gets drawn back into playing with power because
it comes to the conclusion that it's better for somebody who feels that way about power
to be wielding it than people who don't have any self-consciousness
about the dangers of wielding power.
So in that sense, it's a comment on the power of the media,
but it's also a comment on the morality of power, on the paradox of power,
which is that if you leave power to be wielded by people who do not see the dangers,
the personal dangers, the psychological dangers of being involved with it,
then you end up with people like Benedict Howard,
Sir Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon,
who do not have self-consciousness about the personal dangers,
the moral dangers of chasing after power,
whereas somebody like Barron, who is certainly an imperfect person, as old people are,
at least his saving grace, if he has one,
is that he is well aware of the personal dangers of being involved in a quest for power.
When Spinrad tried to get the novel published in this country, he was unsuccessful,
so he tried and written.
But there was an outcry in Parliament against the book.
He relates the story for us.
That novel, and I'll try, was written on a contract, a double day,
who then rejected it.
As you know, you have to remember, the political climate of the era.
They didn't reject it.
They said, we'll publish it if you cut out all the sex, all the swear words, and all the politics,
which was the whole book.
So it took a long time to resell that book here.
In the meantime, I took it to Milford, to a Milford conference, and Mike Murcock was there,
and he read it, and he locked it, and he serialized it in New World,
so his first publication was actually in England, in the magazine.
Now, halfway through the serialization, I forget exactly which part, part three,
part four, W. H. Smith, which was the biggest distributor,
still is the biggest distributor in England, refused to distribute the magazine because of the book in it.
Now, at that time, New World had an arts council grant,
and the arts council was in the organ of the British government.
Now, the arts council supported the magazine against Smith publicly.
And so the flap in Parliament arose when certain right-wing members of Parliament were aghast
that an organ of the British government, the arts council, was defending this kind of stuff.
And that's how it became a parliamentary issue.
Bugjack Barron is being made into a movie, with a screenplay by Harlan Ellison
and direction by radical filmmaker Costa Gavras. It should be interesting.
More with Norman Spinrad next time.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
Norman Spinrad's 1979 science fiction novel, A World Between, signaled a change in his fiction.
Spinrad's early work usually contain either subtle or overt criticism of various aspects of society.
Bugjack Barron, the men in the jungle, and agent of chaos are good examples of this type.
A World Between is also a socially oriented novel, but there's a different...
...front element in it. Spinrad explains.
I would say in general that up until, I guess, The World Between really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical of this,
of critical of existing societies, critical of various things that were going on.
A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really, in any kind of way.
And it's a prescriptive kind of book.
It's more of a... instead of presenting critical images of other things,
the idea is to create a more positive image of a more positive kind of future.
I think if you spend enough time criticizing what exists,
at some point you have some kind of moral obligation to present something more positive and replace...
...what you find negative.
The setting for the novel is a fit one for a utopia.
It takes place on the planet Pacifica, a beautiful world of blue ocean and lush green islands that's been colonized by humans.
Inhabitants of Pacifica live private lives in their isolated islands.
There are no large urban centers to cause pollution over population or poverty.
Even though they are physically isolated, the Pacificans remain in close electronic contact with one another.
They govern themselves, in fact, with a tight media web that allows them to vote immediately on any issue of importance.
But into this idyllic world comes two opposed political forces from Earth,
bent on the ideological conquest of Pacifica.
One force is the Institute for Transcendental Science,
a powerful organization whose goal is galactic unity under their control.
They are extreme, and Spinrad says they have two basic flaws.
One is the unexamined, subtle male shoveness bias of their culture.
And the other one is the ultimate conviction that what they are doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe,
and that therefore they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures.
And then, and then this is our, absoluteism I guess would be the, even the kind of theocratic absoluteism would be their, would be their flaws.
The other force is the Femocrats, a militant women's liberation group that is also an extreme.
The struggle of these two groups for control of planets all across the galaxy is called the Pink and Blue War.
It's clearly a male-female conflict, and so far every planet the two sides have approached has ended up on one side or the other.
But Pacifica is different. Spinrad's utopia is a stable and intelligent one.
The Pacificans reject both extremes and even change the minds of a few of the combatants.
We asked Spinrad about reactions to the book. How did women for instance respond to the Femocratic women's livers?
The strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number of men have, you know,
reacted in a kind of male, male liberal guilt, male feminist kind of reaction against that.
But at most part women have liked the book. Women have identified with it more than men.
And actually I even got one or two good reviews in feminist places.
I think that's not quite what I expected, but that seems to be the way it happened.
I have not gotten a heavy feminist flag from that a little bit, but not much.
Not much, because I think women who are involved in feminism or have been or know women who are,
can recognize a certain aspect of the feminist movement in the Femocrats.
Whereas men who are trying to show how liberator they are would not dream of admitting such a thing.
A world between. A different sort of book for Norman Spinrad, and we'll have more on him tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz. And Daryl Lane.
Norman Spinrad's most recent novel, Songs from the Stars, was published by Simon and Schuster in 1980.
The book describes a fragmented future society in a world devastated by nuclear war.
This, of course, is a typical Spinrad theme.
But the novel also communicates the sense of wonder characteristic of good science fiction,
when it describes the marvels of contact with an alien civilization.
Society has split in two factions in Songs from the Stars.
One faction is an Aquarian society which bans all technology, in fact anything having to do with science,
since this was what was responsible for almost destroying the Earth.
And the other faction are the black scientists who keep technology alive
and maintain an illicit smuggling operation with the Aquarian society.
Spinrad talks about these opposed factions.
It's a book against duality. You have two fragmented societies.
They are both kind of like half societies.
The Aquarian society there is a very nice thing that works, except it really only works because it accepts something from the black scientists,
which it doesn't want to admit that's accepted.
And the black scientists are again another kind of absolutism, which doesn't sell it.
It's a book about horror unity, I guess.
As usual, with Spinrad, the book's conflict reflects current social conditions.
And then you know, a mirror is the present thing in our society.
Where on the one hand you have a great big space movement, people wanting to get into space,
and all the Neil people and all that stuff.
On the other hand you have a real adivistic Neoludite movement, an anti-nuclear movement,
which is really kind of willfully ignorant of a lot of things.
In a way, these are the two things that could bring about the crash.
As well as what with some armaments.
So I think it's basically a book about the grand philosophical attempt at that book,
is to try and bridge the gap between science and reason, and feeling emotion and mysticism.
And to point to a horror unity between the two things,
and a way from the false dichotomies and false dualisms,
which seem to be really destroying Western civilization.
The protagonist in the book is a laid-back Aquarian, clear blue loo.
Along with his girl and a scientist, he travels up to a satellite circling the Earth.
There are the three of them receive communication from some incredibly advanced alien civilizations
in another part of the galaxy.
With the knowledge sent by the helpful aliens, it seems the humans will solve their own problems,
unite, and start progressing toward the stars once more.
We asked Spinrad that if and when we contact an alien civilization,
is it likely they will be helpful rather than hostile?
As I said in the book, I do believe that any civilization that's going to last a million years,
it's going to be a million years or whatever, or even a hundred thousand years more advanced than us,
they've been around that much longer, had that much more advanced science.
If it's going to survive to that length of its own history, it's got to be by that time
philosophically and emotionally pretty together, or will long since have destroyed itself.
I mean, we certainly will not survive a million years of our own history if it continues as it has.
In order that any civilization that survives a million years of its own history
has had to have gotten its political, psychological, and philosophical act together.
And I don't see why...
I do believe that if and when we run into that kind of really advanced civilization,
that they will, if not be directly, actively helpful,
certainly will be benign and will not be interested in either eating us or conquering our planet
or blowing us up or anything like that.
Songs from the Stars is a thoughtfully written book with a theme, but it's also good, exciting science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The following is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Darrell Lane.
James B. Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from Yesteryear,
is a fascinating blend of computers, space exploration, and genetic engineering.
It's about a robot probe that discovers a habitable planet ten light years from Earth,
but it's different than the usual probe imagined by science fiction authors.
Right. This one is equipped to manufacture human beings. Hogan explains.
We read a lot of stories about starships that go on long voyages that take maybe centuries,
and inevitably they've got frozen bodies or bodies in suspended animation or something like that.
But when you think about it, it seems rather an inefficient way to think,
and they're not doing anything. The machines can fly the ship. The computers can get it there.
The people aren't doing anything except just lying there freezing.
So why not let the machines fly the ship and make the people when you get there?
If we look at the progress made in molecular biology and genetic engineering in the last couple of decades,
we already manufactured quite complex organic molecules to specifications,
such as drugs and certain anaesthetics.
If we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to say you couldn't make a complete set of human DNA?
In other words, instead of sending bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space,
why not just store all the genetic information necessary to make people?
Electronically in the computers and create them when you have found the planet that the instruments say they could survive on.
So the computers make a race of humans, raise them, and place them on the planet.
It sounds a bit mechanical, a little inhuman perhaps, but Hogan thinks it could work out beautifully.
So here's the interesting possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos
that were created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the machines does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at all.
It could be quite a charming and amusing one.
The interesting thoughts that the book starts to play with is here is a race of kids that are being raised by some very rational, direct, down-to-earth entities
who don't double talk or deceive or have all these layers of human game playing that we have to contend with.
And they're being raised completely without any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults with their prejudices and hatreds and taboos.
And a lot of the other nonsense is that make life so complicated in our society.
As you might expect, these machine-raised humans are eventually contacted by humans from Earth.
Now let's imagine that a mission from Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is usually a 20-year voyage, maybe.
So we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people, a space colony with engines.
With its government, its military, its church organizations, its commercial institutions.
The whole of society in miniature with its time-proved mechanisms for controlling and subordinating a population.
Which traditionally, a ruling elite through history has imposed itself by restricting the flow of wealth
and by offering protection either from real or imagined threats.
And so what happens when a race of machine-raised people eventually collides with a race with people-raised people?
And that's really what this story's all about.
Voyage from the Esther Urobe out in paperback at the end of July.
Next week we'll have a series of shows on the works of James B. Hogan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.